Laurence Garcia & Melvin Gitbumrungsin
CS 2990
Dr. Markus Eger

Design Analysis of DPS Idle

Introduction
    DPS Idle is a free to play idle game where your character explores a dungeon, defeating enemies, and unlocks cards to defeat stronger enemies. While 
being a very simple game on the surface, there are multiple components to this game that makes it an addicting time for players to enjoy.

Gameplay Loop
    DPS Idle features both a core gameplay loop with its monsters, cards, and dungeon system, and an outer gameplay loop with its guild and hero systems. 
With its core gameplay loop, the player starts off with defeating the first monster, from there they receive gold to buy a random card. The random card 
has a property that will deal damage to the monster, help boost damage of other cards, or earn more gold. From here the player defeats more monsters, with 
each type of monster being worth more gold and more hit points, which earns the player more gold to buy more cards and the gameplay loops itself. When a 
player unlocks all the cards in a deck, they have the option to upgrade one of those cards to a silver card, which will unlock that card for the rest of 
the round and increase the effects of that card, but it will place all the other cards back into the deck. 
    The outer gameplay loop of DPS Idle occurs when the player has enough gold to join a guild. Joining a guild provides a multiplier for a specific stat 
that grows as the current run goes on. Within the time played, only 2 guilds were able to be joined, the merchant guild and the warriors guild, which 
multiplies the gold income and damage per second respectively. The player has the option to stay in the guild for more benefits for their current run, such 
as free unlocks for their cards and instant kills on specific monsters. However, the player also has the option to leave the guild. Upon leaving the guild, 
they can start a new run, but with the benefit of the multiplier they received and grew from the previous run. This allows the player to start fresh but get 
further into the dungeon at a faster pace, creating the outer gameplay loop.

Space, Objects w/ Attributes, Actions
    Being an idle game, the space is primarily focused on the game screen and the UI elements for the different menus. The center of the screen has the monster 
with its hit points, amount of gold it was worth, and depending on the monster another currency with the percentage of obtaining that currency on defeat. 
The other parts of the screen are taken up by UI elements showing either the cards the player has unlocked or the spheres of magic, where if the player clicks 
on them a specific amount of times, a damage multiplier will be applied to the cards. There are also other screens that allow for more upgrades such as the Guild 
and Heroes System.
    There are various objects in the game that impact the gameplay systems. The main object, the player, has gold, leafs, cards, silver blue coins, skulls, and 
total DPS which correlates to the cards. The cards themselves have a deck they belong to, a color indicating their “level”, and a function, whether they deal 
damage, give more gold, or boost other cards. The monsters have hit points and the gold they are worth upon defeating them, and some monsters also have another 
currency they drop by chance. Chests by cards of a specific deck and have a cost that increases with each purchase. Guilds have a multiplier that grows as the 
run continues, and upgrades and bonuses that apply to the current run. Heroes feature upgrades that also apply to the current run and to future runs. Finally 
there are achievements and quests that can unlock gems, which are the premium currency of the game.
    With the space and objects, the player has multiple actions they can take. The most basic action is clicking on the monster to deal damage, but this quickly 
becomes irrelevant as the click (until the hero upgrades) just stays at 1 damage per click. The player can use the gold to open chests to obtain a random card in 
the deck, with the chest price increasing after each purchase. They can also click on the spheres of magic to add a damage multiplier to the player. Additionally 
they can use a leaf or silver blue coin to enhance a random card. They can join a guild to have a multiplier build up overtime and leave that guild to restart the 
game but with the multiplier applied to their next run. They can also choose a hero after meeting a certain criteria such as having 8 silver cards. It should be 
noted that they can also go to the shop to use real money to buy gems for effects that last between runs.

Goal of the game, and how player decisions affect reaching the goal
    The overarching goal of the game is to clear the dungeon by defeating each enemy at least once. The player cannot move on to the next monster without first 
defeating the previous one. While this is the primary goal of the game, there are a few other sub-goals that the player may strive for such as collecting/upgrading 
all the cards, getting as much DPS as possible, and upgrading the hero as much as possible. There are a few decisions that can be made by the player, with some 
affecting their progress more than others. Three of the most impactful decisions that the player can make are: which chest to spend their gold on, which card to 
upgrade, and when to leave the guild for a new run. 
    Choosing which chest to spend their gold on can greatly affect a player’s progress since there are times where one chest may be more advantageous than others. 
In general, the later game decks are more powerful than the previous ones, but there is a point where sticking to the same chest leads to diminishing returns. This 
is when it would become more beneficial for the player to choose a different chest to purchase, since it would offset the diminishing returns. Another impactful 
choice the player must make is choosing which card to upgrade. Some cards may lead to a huge short term gain in resources, but end up losing value as time passes. 
Other cards may provide the opposite effect. If the player chooses a non-optimal card, they may find themself feeling stuck. They may not be able to collect and 
upgrade cards at a fast rate, and their DPS may also suffer as a result of choosing to upgrade a card at the wrong time. Finally, choosing when to leave a guild 
to restart their progress can also impact a player’s ability to achieve their goals. There comes a point where progress will inevitably slow down so much to the 
point where a player may feel completely stuck. To escape this situation, the player has the choice of leaving their guild and restarting all of their progress, 
but this time they have a substantial multiplier to either their income or damage per second to ensure that they get farther than they did in their previous run.
    All three of these decisions mentioned share a common goal: to offset diminishing returns as much as possible. The player’s job is to keep progress flowing at 
all times and avoid reaching a point where they are unable to progress any further. In doing so, this will help the player clear the dungeon at a faster rate, gain 
resources at a faster rate, and it keeps the game’s sense of gratification flowing. 

Effect of luck and skill on the game
    It should be noted that all of the player’s decisions will result in a gain of resources in one way or another; however, there are certainly some decisions that 
will lead to a much greater gain than others. Knowing which decisions to make is the “skill” aspect of the game. If a player is able to properly assess which decision 
would result in a larger increase in progress, they would be able to achieve their goals much faster than someone who makes random decisions. For example, if someone 
is able to do the math and calculate which upgraded card would result in the biggest increase in DPS, this would greatly influence how quickly they progress. However, 
there are still a few “luck” aspects of the game that must be considered. 
    It is completely random which card gets drawn when a player purchases a chest. They are able to draw a new card, but oftentimes players find themselves continuously
 drawing cards that they’ve already drawn, which slows down their ability to upgrade cards. This can cause players to get stuck at certain times since they are unable 
 to draw the card that they need to keep upgrading. Another instance of luck in the game is when a player chooses to boost their cards. The card that is chosen to get 
 boosted is completely random, and it is possible for unimportant cards to get boosted instead of a more valuable card. While this isn’t as impactful as the randomness 
 of drawing cards from chests, it can still affect a player’s progress in the long run. 
    Even though the majority of a player’s run is determined by their skill, these instances of luck are still capable of greatly impacting their gameplay. They may get 
stuck trying to draw the card they need, or they may get everything they need and make great progress. This is entirely determined by how lucky the player gets. The 
percentage of how much “skill” determines the course of action in the game is most likely around 90%, while luck contributes to approximately 10% of the gameplay.

